<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h2>
			<p>Sometimes, while meditating on these things in solitude, I‚Äôve got up in a sudden terror, and put on my bonnet to go see how all was at the farm. I‚Äôve persuaded my conscience that it was a duty to warn him how people talked regarding his ways; and then I‚Äôve recollected his confirmed bad habits, and, hopeless of benefiting him, have flinched from reentering the dismal house, doubting if I could bear to be taken at my word.</p>
			<p>One time I passed the old gate, going out of my way, on a journey to Gimmerton. It was about the period that my narrative has reached: a bright frosty afternoon; the ground bare, and the road hard and dry. I came to a stone where the highway branches off on to the moor at your left hand; a rough sand-pillar, with the letters <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">W.H.</abbr> cut on its north side, on the east, <abbr>G.</abbr>, and on the southwest, <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:initialism">T.G.</abbr> It serves as a guidepost to the Grange, the Heights, and village. The sun shone yellow on its grey head, reminding me of summer; and I cannot say why, but all at once a gush of child‚Äôs sensations flowed into my heart. Hindley and I held it a favourite spot twenty years before. I gazed long at the weatherworn block; and, stooping down, perceived a hole near the bottom still full of snail-shells and pebbles, which we were fond of storing there with more perishable things; and, as fresh as reality, it appeared that I beheld my early playmate seated on the withered turf: his dark, square head bent forward, and his little hand scooping out the earth with a piece of slate. ‚ÄúPoor Hindley!‚Äù I exclaimed, involuntarily. I started: my bodily eye was cheated into a momentary belief that the child lifted its face and stared straight into mine! It vanished in a twinkling; but immediately I felt an irresistible yearning to be at the Heights. Superstition urged me to comply with this impulse: supposing he should be dead! I thought‚ÅÝ‚Äîor should die soon!‚ÅÝ‚Äîsupposing it were a sign of death! The nearer I got to the house the more agitated I grew; and on catching sight of it I trembled in every limb. The apparition had outstripped me: it stood looking through the gate. That was my first idea on observing an elf-locked, brown-eyed boy setting his ruddy countenance against the bars. Further reflection suggested this must be Hareton, <em>my</em> Hareton, not altered greatly since I left him, ten months since.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGod bless thee, darling!‚Äù I cried, forgetting instantaneously my foolish fears. ‚ÄúHareton, it‚Äôs Nelly! Nelly, thy nurse.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He retreated out of arm‚Äôs length, and picked up a large flint.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI am come to see thy father, Hareton,‚Äù I added, guessing from the action that Nelly, if she lived in his memory at all, was not recognised as one with me.</p>
			<p>He raised his missile to hurl it; I commenced a soothing speech, but could not stay his hand: the stone struck my bonnet; and then ensued, from the stammering lips of the little fellow, a string of curses, which, whether he comprehended them or not, were delivered with practised emphasis, and distorted his baby features into a shocking expression of malignity. You may be certain this grieved more than angered me. Fit to cry, I took an orange from my pocket, and offered it to propitiate him. He hesitated, and then snatched it from my hold; as if he fancied I only intended to tempt and disappoint him. I showed another, keeping it out of his reach.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWho has taught you those fine words, my bairn?‚Äù I inquired. ‚ÄúThe curate?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDamn the curate, and thee! Gie me that,‚Äù he replied.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTell us where you got your lessons, and you shall have it,‚Äù said I. ‚ÄúWho‚Äôs your master?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDevil daddy,‚Äù was his answer.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd what do you learn from daddy?‚Äù I continued.</p>
			<p>He jumped at the fruit; I raised it higher. ‚ÄúWhat does he teach you?‚Äù I asked.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNaught,‚Äù said he, ‚Äúbut to keep out of his gait. Daddy cannot bide me, because I swear at him.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAh! and the devil teaches you to swear at daddy?‚Äù I observed.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAy‚ÅÝ‚Äînay,‚Äù he drawled.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWho, then?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHeathcliff.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I asked if he liked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHeathcliff.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAy!‚Äù he answered again.</p>
			<p>Desiring to have his reasons for liking him, I could only gather the sentences‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúI known‚Äôt: he pays dad back what he gies to me‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe curses daddy for cursing me. He says I mun do as I will.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd the curate does not teach you to read and write, then?‚Äù I pursued.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, I was told the curate should have his ‚∏ª teeth dashed down his ‚∏ª throat, if he stepped over the threshold‚ÅÝ‚ÄîHeathcliff had promised that!‚Äù</p>
			<p>I put the orange in his hand, and bade him tell his father that a woman called Nelly Dean was waiting to speak with him, by the garden gate. He went up the walk, and entered the house; but, instead of Hindley, Heathcliff appeared on the door-stones; and I turned directly and ran down the road as hard as ever I could race, making no halt till I gained the guidepost, and feeling as scared as if I had raised a goblin. This is not much connected with Miss Isabella‚Äôs affair: except that it urged me to resolve further on mounting vigilant guard, and doing my utmost to check the spread of such bad influence at the Grange: even though I should wake a domestic storm, by thwarting <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLinton‚Äôs pleasure.</p>
			<p>The next time Heathcliff came my young lady chanced to be feeding some pigeons in the court. She had never spoken a word to her sister-in-law for three days; but she had likewise dropped her fretful complaining, and we found it a great comfort. Heathcliff had not the habit of bestowing a single unnecessary civility on Miss Linton, I knew. Now, as soon as he beheld her, his first precaution was to take a sweeping survey of the house-front. I was standing by the kitchen-window, but I drew out of sight. He then stepped across the pavement to her, and said something: she seemed embarrassed, and desirous of getting away; to prevent it, he laid his hand on her arm. She averted her face: he apparently put some question which she had no mind to answer. There was another rapid glance at the house, and supposing himself unseen, the scoundrel had the impudence to embrace her.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúJudas! Traitor!‚Äù I ejaculated. ‚ÄúYou are a hypocrite, too, are you? A deliberate deceiver.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWho is, Nelly?‚Äù said Catherine‚Äôs voice at my elbow: I had been over-intent on watching the pair outside to mark her entrance.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYour worthless friend!‚Äù I answered, warmly: ‚Äúthe sneaking rascal yonder. Ah, he has caught a glimpse of us‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe is coming in! I wonder will he have the heart to find a plausible excuse for making love to Miss, when he told you he hated her?‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLinton saw Isabella tear herself free, and run into the garden; and a minute after, Heathcliff opened the door. I couldn‚Äôt withhold giving some loose to my indignation; but Catherine angrily insisted on silence, and threatened to order me out of the kitchen, if I dared to be so presumptuous as to put in my insolent tongue.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTo hear you, people might think you were the mistress!‚Äù she cried. ‚ÄúYou want setting down in your right place! Heathcliff, what are you about, raising this stir? I said you must let Isabella alone!‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI beg you will, unless you are tired of being received here, and wish Linton to draw the bolts against you!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGod forbid that he should try!‚Äù answered the black villain. I detested him just then. ‚ÄúGod keep him meek and patient! Every day I grow madder after sending him to heaven!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHush!‚Äù said Catherine, shutting the inner door. ‚ÄúDon‚Äôt vex me. Why have you disregarded my request? Did she come across you on purpose?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat is it to you?‚Äù he growled. ‚ÄúI have a right to kiss her, if she chooses; and you have no right to object. I am not <em>your</em> husband: <em>you</em> needn‚Äôt be jealous of me!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm not jealous of you,‚Äù replied the mistress; ‚ÄúI‚Äôm jealous for you. Clear your face: you shan‚Äôt scowl at me! If you like Isabella, you shall marry her. But do you like her? Tell the truth, Heathcliff! There, you won‚Äôt answer. I‚Äôm certain you don‚Äôt.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd would <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝLinton approve of his sister marrying that man?‚Äù I inquired.</p>
			<p>‚Äú<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝLinton should approve,‚Äù returned my lady, decisively.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe might spare himself the trouble,‚Äù said Heathcliff: ‚ÄúI could do as well without his approbation. And as to you, Catherine, I have a mind to speak a few words now, while we are at it. I want you to be aware that I <em>know</em> you have treated me infernally‚ÅÝ‚Äîinfernally! Do you hear? And if you flatter yourself that I don‚Äôt perceive it, you are a fool; and if you think I can be consoled by sweet words, you are an idiot: and if you fancy I‚Äôll suffer unrevenged, I‚Äôll convince you of the contrary, in a very little while! Meantime, thank you for telling me your sister-in-law‚Äôs secret: I swear I‚Äôll make the most of it. And stand you aside!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat new phase of his character is this?‚Äù exclaimed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLinton, in amazement. ‚ÄúI‚Äôve treated you infernally‚ÅÝ‚Äîand you‚Äôll take your revenge! How will you take it, ungrateful brute? How have I treated you infernally?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI seek no revenge on you,‚Äù replied Heathcliff, less vehemently. ‚ÄúThat‚Äôs not the plan. The tyrant grinds down his slaves and they don‚Äôt turn against him; they crush those beneath them. You are welcome to torture me to death for your amusement, only allow me to amuse myself a little in the same style, and refrain from insult as much as you are able. Having levelled my palace, don‚Äôt erect a hovel and complacently admire your own charity in giving me that for a home. If I imagined you really wished me to marry Isabel, I‚Äôd cut my throat!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, the evil is that I am <em>not</em> jealous, is it?‚Äù cried Catherine. ‚ÄúWell, I won‚Äôt repeat my offer of a wife: it is as bad as offering Satan a lost soul. Your bliss lies, like his, in inflicting misery. You prove it. Edgar is restored from the ill-temper he gave way to at your coming; I begin to be secure and tranquil; and you, restless to know us at peace, appear resolved on exciting a quarrel. Quarrel with Edgar, if you please, Heathcliff, and deceive his sister: you‚Äôll hit on exactly the most efficient method of revenging yourself on me.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The conversation ceased. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLinton sat down by the fire, flushed and gloomy. The spirit which served her was growing intractable: she could neither lay nor control it. He stood on the hearth with folded arms, brooding on his evil thoughts; and in this position I left them to seek the master, who was wondering what kept Catherine below so long.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúEllen,‚Äù said he, when I entered, ‚Äúhave you seen your mistress?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes; she‚Äôs in the kitchen, sir,‚Äù I answered. ‚ÄúShe‚Äôs sadly put out by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHeathcliff‚Äôs behaviour: and, indeed, I do think it‚Äôs time to arrange his visits on another footing. There‚Äôs harm in being too soft, and now it‚Äôs come to this‚ÅÝ‚Äî.‚Äù And I related the scene in the court, and, as near as I dared, the whole subsequent dispute. I fancied it could not be very prejudicial to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLinton; unless she made it so afterwards, by assuming the defensive for her guest. Edgar Linton had difficulty in hearing me to the close. His first words revealed that he did not clear his wife of blame.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThis is insufferable!‚Äù he exclaimed. ‚ÄúIt is disgraceful that she should own him for a friend, and force his company on me! Call me two men out of the hall, Ellen. Catherine shall linger no longer to argue with the low ruffian‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI have humoured her enough.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He descended, and bidding the servants wait in the passage, went, followed by me, to the kitchen. Its occupants had recommenced their angry discussion: <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLinton, at least, was scolding with renewed vigour; Heathcliff had moved to the window, and hung his head, somewhat cowed by her violent rating apparently. He saw the master first, and made a hasty motion that she should be silent; which she obeyed, abruptly, on discovering the reason of his intimation.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHow is this?‚Äù said Linton, addressing her; ‚Äúwhat notion of propriety must you have to remain here, after the language which has been held to you by that blackguard? I suppose, because it is his ordinary talk you think nothing of it: you are habituated to his baseness, and, perhaps, imagine I can get used to it too!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHave you been listening at the door, Edgar?‚Äù asked the mistress, in a tone particularly calculated to provoke her husband, implying both carelessness and contempt of his irritation. Heathcliff, who had raised his eyes at the former speech, gave a sneering laugh at the latter; on purpose, it seemed, to draw <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝLinton‚Äôs attention to him. He succeeded; but Edgar did not mean to entertain him with any high flights of passion.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôve been so far forbearing with you, sir,‚Äù he said quietly; ‚Äúnot that I was ignorant of your miserable, degraded character, but I felt you were only partly responsible for that; and Catherine wishing to keep up your acquaintance, I acquiesced‚ÅÝ‚Äîfoolishly. Your presence is a moral poison that would contaminate the most virtuous: for that cause, and to prevent worse consequences, I shall deny you hereafter admission into this house, and give notice now that I require your instant departure. Three minutes‚Äô delay will render it involuntary and ignominious.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Heathcliff measured the height and breadth of the speaker with an eye full of derision.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCathy, this lamb of yours threatens like a bull!‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúIt is in danger of splitting its skull against my knuckles. By God! <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝLinton, I‚Äôm mortally sorry that you are not worth knocking down!‚Äù</p>
			<p>My master glanced towards the passage, and signed me to fetch the men: he had no intention of hazarding a personal encounter. I obeyed the hint; but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLinton, suspecting something, followed; and when I attempted to call them, she pulled me back, slammed the door to, and locked it.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFair means!‚Äù she said, in answer to her husband‚Äôs look of angry surprise. ‚ÄúIf you have not courage to attack him, make an apology, or allow yourself to be beaten. It will correct you of feigning more valour than you possess. No, I‚Äôll swallow the key before you shall get it! I‚Äôm delightfully rewarded for my kindness to each! After constant indulgence of one‚Äôs weak nature, and the other‚Äôs bad one, I earn for thanks two samples of blind ingratitude, stupid to absurdity! Edgar, I was defending you and yours; and I wish Heathcliff may flog you sick, for daring to think an evil thought of me!‚Äù</p>
			<p>It did not need the medium of a flogging to produce that effect on the master. He tried to wrest the key from Catherine‚Äôs grasp, and for safety she flung it into the hottest part of the fire; whereupon <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝEdgar was taken with a nervous trembling, and his countenance grew deadly pale. For his life he could not avert that excess of emotion: mingled anguish and humiliation overcame him completely. He leant on the back of a chair, and covered his face.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, heavens! In old days this would win you knighthood!‚Äù exclaimed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLinton. ‚ÄúWe are vanquished! we are vanquished! Heathcliff would as soon lift a finger at you as the king would march his army against a colony of mice. Cheer up! you shan‚Äôt be hurt! Your type is not a lamb, it‚Äôs a sucking leveret.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI wish you joy of the milk-blooded coward, Cathy!‚Äù said her friend. ‚ÄúI compliment you on your taste. And that is the slavering, shivering thing you preferred to me! I would not strike him with my fist, but I‚Äôd kick him with my foot, and experience considerable satisfaction. Is he weeping, or is he going to faint for fear?‚Äù</p>
			<p>The fellow approached and gave the chair on which Linton rested a push. He‚Äôd better have kept his distance: my master quickly sprang erect, and struck him full on the throat a blow that would have levelled a slighter man. It took his breath for a minute; and while he choked, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝLinton walked out by the back door into the yard, and from thence to the front entrance.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere! you‚Äôve done with coming here,‚Äù cried Catherine. ‚ÄúGet away, now; he‚Äôll return with a brace of pistols and half-a-dozen assistants. If he did overhear us, of course he‚Äôd never forgive you. You‚Äôve played me an ill turn, Heathcliff! But go‚ÅÝ‚Äîmake haste! I‚Äôd rather see Edgar at bay than you.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo you suppose I‚Äôm going with that blow burning in my gullet?‚Äù he thundered. ‚ÄúBy hell, no! I‚Äôll crush his ribs in like a rotten hazelnut before I cross the threshold! If I don‚Äôt floor him now, I shall murder him some time; so, as you value his existence, let me get at him!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe is not coming,‚Äù I interposed, framing a bit of a lie. ‚ÄúThere‚Äôs the coachman and the two gardeners; you‚Äôll surely not wait to be thrust into the road by them! Each has a bludgeon; and master will, very likely, be watching from the parlour-windows to see that they fulfil his orders.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The gardeners and coachman were there: but Linton was with them. They had already entered the court. Heathcliff, on the second thoughts, resolved to avoid a struggle against three underlings: he seized the poker, smashed the lock from the inner door, and made his escape as they tramped in.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLinton, who was very much excited, bade me accompany her upstairs. She did not know my share in contributing to the disturbance, and I was anxious to keep her in ignorance.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm nearly distracted, Nelly!‚Äù she exclaimed, throwing herself on the sofa. ‚ÄúA thousand smiths‚Äô hammers are beating in my head! Tell Isabella to shun me; this uproar is owing to her; and should she or anyone else aggravate my anger at present, I shall get wild. And, Nelly, say to Edgar, if you see him again tonight, that I‚Äôm in danger of being seriously ill. I wish it may prove true. He has startled and distressed me shockingly! I want to frighten him. Besides, he might come and begin a string of abuse or complainings; I‚Äôm certain I should recriminate, and God knows where we should end! Will you do so, my good Nelly? You are aware that I am no way blamable in this matter. What possessed him to turn listener? Heathcliff‚Äôs talk was outrageous, after you left us; but I could soon have diverted him from Isabella, and the rest meant nothing. Now all is dashed wrong; by the fool‚Äôs craving to hear evil of self, that haunts some people like a demon! Had Edgar never gathered our conversation, he would never have been the worse for it. Really, when he opened on me in that unreasonable tone of displeasure after I had scolded Heathcliff till I was hoarse for him, I did not care hardly what they did to each other; especially as I felt that, however the scene closed, we should all be driven asunder for nobody knows how long! Well, if I cannot keep Heathcliff for my friend‚ÅÝ‚Äîif Edgar will be mean and jealous, I‚Äôll try to break their hearts by breaking my own. That will be a prompt way of finishing all, when I am pushed to extremity! But it‚Äôs a deed to be reserved for a forlorn hope; I‚Äôd not take Linton by surprise with it. To this point he has been discreet in dreading to provoke me; you must represent the peril of quitting that policy, and remind him of my passionate temper, verging, when kindled, on frenzy. I wish you could dismiss that apathy out of that countenance, and look rather more anxious about me.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The stolidity with which I received these instructions was, no doubt, rather exasperating: for they were delivered in perfect sincerity; but I believed a person who could plan the turning of her fits of passion to account, beforehand, might, by exerting her will, manage to control herself tolerably, even while under their influence; and I did not wish to ‚Äúfrighten‚Äù her husband, as she said, and multiply his annoyances for the purpose of serving her selfishness. Therefore I said nothing when I met the master coming towards the parlour; but I took the liberty of turning back to listen whether they would resume their quarrel together. He began to speak first.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúRemain where you are, Catherine,‚Äù he said; without any anger in his voice, but with much sorrowful despondency. ‚ÄúI shall not stay. I am neither come to wrangle nor be reconciled; but I wish just to learn whether, after this evening‚Äôs events, you intend to continue your intimacy with‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, for mercy‚Äôs sake,‚Äù interrupted the mistress, stamping her foot, ‚Äúfor mercy‚Äôs sake, let us hear no more of it now! Your cold blood cannot be worked into a fever: your veins are full of ice-water; but mine are boiling, and the sight of such chillness makes them dance.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTo get rid of me, answer my question,‚Äù persevered <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝLinton. ‚ÄúYou must answer it; and that violence does not alarm me. I have found that you can be as stoical as anyone, when you please. Will you give up Heathcliff hereafter, or will you give up me? It is impossible for you to be <em>my</em> friend and <em>his</em> at the same time; and I absolutely <em>require</em> to know which you choose.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI require to be let alone!‚Äù exclaimed Catherine, furiously. ‚ÄúI demand it! Don‚Äôt you see I can scarcely stand? Edgar, you‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou leave me!‚Äù</p>
			<p>She rang the bell till it broke with a twang; I entered leisurely. It was enough to try the temper of a saint, such senseless, wicked rages! There she lay dashing her head against the arm of the sofa, and grinding her teeth, so that you might fancy she would crash them to splinters! <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝLinton stood looking at her in sudden compunction and fear. He told me to fetch some water. She had no breath for speaking. I brought a glass full; and as she would not drink, I sprinkled it on her face. In a few seconds she stretched herself out stiff, and turned up her eyes, while her cheeks, at once blanched and livid, assumed the aspect of death. Linton looked terrified.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere is nothing in the world the matter,‚Äù I whispered. I did not want him to yield, though I could not help being afraid in my heart.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe has blood on her lips!‚Äù he said, shuddering.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNever mind!‚Äù I answered, tartly. And I told him how she had resolved, previous to his coming, on exhibiting a fit of frenzy. I incautiously gave the account aloud, and she heard me; for she started up‚ÅÝ‚Äîher hair flying over her shoulders, her eyes flashing, the muscles of her neck and arms standing out preternaturally. I made up my mind for broken bones, at least; but she only glared about her for an instant, and then rushed from the room. The master directed me to follow; I did, to her chamber-door: she hindered me from going further by securing it against me.</p>
			<p>As she never offered to descend to breakfast next morning, I went to ask whether she would have some carried up. ‚ÄúNo!‚Äù she replied, peremptorily. The same question was repeated at dinner and tea; and again on the morrow after, and received the same answer. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝLinton, on his part, spent his time in the library, and did not inquire concerning his wife‚Äôs occupations. Isabella and he had had an hour‚Äôs interview, during which he tried to elicit from her some sentiment of proper horror for Heathcliff‚Äôs advances: but he could make nothing of her evasive replies, and was obliged to close the examination unsatisfactorily; adding, however, a solemn warning, that if she were so insane as to encourage that worthless suitor, it would dissolve all bonds of relationship between herself and him.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
